Now the next thing that we should also know that, if there are sequence of function calls,
Then how are the memory is
allocated inside stack? So, I'll down a piece of code, a small sample code, then I'll show you how the
memory is allocated inside the stack for the sequence of function calls.
Here I have a sample piece of code.
This is the main function, main function is having 2 variables and then it is calling function fun1( ), and
fun1( ) is having its local variable x, then, it is calling fun2( ) and passing parameter x. This fun2( )
is taking parameter as i, then also it's having its own variable a. If following function calls are
made, then how the memory is allocated for all these functions,
Let us look at it.
First of all, when I want to run this program,
The machine code of this program will be copied in code section. So, I will write it like this, fun2(  )
this is the machine code of fun2( ),
And assume that this is for fun1( ), and then, this is the main function.
This is the machine code for this entire program.
Now, let us start executing. When the program starts executing, it will start from the main function.
The moment it enters inside main function, it requires variable. So the memory for a and b will be allocated
inside this area, or
this section, and that is a and b.
So I making it as a single block.
These are the two variables.
Now next, main function calls function fun1( ).
Now, the control goes to function fun1( ). The moment control goes here,
inside this, the first thing is, variable is the required. Variable declarations is there.
So the variable is created inside the stack
for this function fun1( ), that is x.
So this piece of memory belongs to main function,
And above that, this belongs to fun1( ), right. Now, which function is executing?
Currently fun1( ) is executing, because we have called from here.
So this topmost activation record belongs to which function? Currently executing function,
That is fun1( ). Then, fun1( ) will call fun2( ).
So, again the control goes to fun2( ). Then, that is having 2 variables, 1 is its parameter, and
the other 1 is its local variable.
So memory is allocated for those variables, i,
and a, and this is for fun2( ). Now, presently fun2( ) is running and the topmost activation record
inside this area is fun2( ).
So currently executing function with access is the topmost activation record.
Now, one thing you can observe that, we started from main function.
It has not yet finished, but it has called fun1( ).
So main function activation record is as it is inside the stack.
Then activation record for fun1( ) is created, means, memory for fun1( ) is allocated. Then it is still
running, but it has called fun2( ). So, the activation record for fun2( ) is created, and activation
record of fun1( ) is still there in the memory.
Now let us continue our execution. fun2( ) is the current executing function. Now, when fun2( )
fun2( ) has finished, terminated, then,
control goes back to fun1( ). It will come back, after this point, it will come back to fun1( ),
fun1( ), inside this fun1( ), that is, after this line it will come to this line.
Suppose there is a statement here, so it will come to this statement. What happens for the activation
record of that fun2( )? This will be deleted.
Then, after this fun1( ) has finished executing this statement,
It will come back to the main function, after this fun1( ),
let us say there is some statement, it will come to that statement.
And once the fun1( ) ends, its activation record is also removed from the main memory, that
is from the stack.
Then, main function also ends.
So, it's Activation record is also deleted from main memory.
So, now you can see that, how the activation records for sequence of function calls were created.
First, main function, then above that fun1( ), above that fun2( ). Right now, fun2( )
fun2( ) is running, these are already there in the memory. When fun2( ) ends,
it will delete, and come back here. When it ends, delete and come back here, when it ends, delete and the
program ends.
So the way, activation records are created like this, and then deleted like this.
So this mechanism is stack, right? Top and top and top, then, delete, delete, delete.
So this mechanism is stack,
So that's why, this section of memory behaves like a stack, during the function call,
So that's why it is named as stack.
So that's all, this is how the main memory is used, or stack memory is used for function calls.
Now, one important thing to observe; How much memory is required by a function?
Depends on the number of variables and their sizes.
And this is decided by compiler only.
So this memory is automatically created, and automatically destroyed, the programmer doesn't have to do
anything for its allocation and destruction, just programmer has to declare the variable.
So the conclusion is, whatever the variables you declare in the program, or whatever the parameters
your functions are taking, for all of them, memory is
allocated inside the stack, and it is automatically created, and automatically destroyed when the
function ends.
Next, we'll talk about heap, and see how memory is dynamically allocated from heap.
Now, Let us learn how heap memory is utilized by a program.
So I have taken a main function, this is mean function, so I'm showing the code here. And this memory, already
we have seen,
Now we have to see heap.
First, let us understand the term Heap. Heap means what? Just piling up.
If the things are kept one above another, or just randomly, we use the term Heap. So, heap is used
in 2 cases. One, if the things are properly organised like a tower-like thing, then also it is a
Heap, and if it is not organised and also it's looking like a tower, then also we call it as Heap.
So, the important point is, Heap word, or term Heap can be used for organised things, as well as
unorganized things.
So here, Heap is the term used for unorganized memory.
It's not organized, stack memory is organized, right?
We already saw, how the activation records are created and deleted.
But, that is not organized.
This is the first point. And, the second point about Heap is that, heap memory should be treated like
a resource.
So, I'll tell you something about the resource, in applications. See, suppose
a printer is a resource for your program.
If your program wants to use a printer, then it can request for a printer.
Use the printer, once it has finished using it, it should release the printer so that the other applications
can use it. Same way, Heap memory
Heap memory should be used like a resource, when required.
You take the memory, when you don't require, you release the memory.
This is a practice that we must do while dealing with heap memory.
So I told you two points.
What is heap,
Second thing, it should be treated as a resource.
The third important point, program can't directly access heap memory.
It can directly access anything inside
code section, anything inside stack. But, it will not access heap memory.
That is like a policy of a program, but it will not access heap memory.
It can if it want to, but it will not access memory.
So programs cannot access heap memory directly.
Then how do they access memory? Using pointer.
So, let me show you, how we can get some memory inside the heap, with the help of a pointer.
Let us check it. First of all for taking some memory,
I have to take a pointer.
The first question, how many bytes does a take? In my discussion, for making it simple,
I say that point it takes 2 bytes.
Actually, the amount of memory taken by pointer depends on size of integer, usually. If integer
is 2 bytes, pointer is 2 bytes.. Integer is 4 bytes, pointer is 4 bytes.
So, let us assume that it is taking 2 bytes.
So let us just assume that pointer is taking 2 bytes. So, this needs 2 bytes. Now, next point.
Where the memory for the pointer will be allocated? See, just now, in the static memory allocation, I told
you that what all the variables are declare in your functions,
they will occupy the memory inside the stack, in their Activation record.
So yes, for this pointer, memory is allocated here.
So this is a pointer. So, it takes 2 bytes, 2 bytes of memory, and this is activation record for
main function.
Now, I want to allocate memory in heap. So, how much memory I want to allocate?
I want to create an array of integer of size 5. So, this new statement will allocate memory in heap, of size 5.
.
So array of size 5, and this pointer will point on this one.
Suppose, the address of this location, the beginning of this is 500. So, 500 is stored here.
This is the method of allocating memory in heap. So wherever you see 'new', it means memory is allocated
allocated in heap. Simple variable declaration,
memory is allocated inside stack. In C++, it is 'new'.
But if I write same thing in C language, then I have to use
malloc( ), and I want
5 integers, so 5 integers, assume integer takes 2 bytes,
So this is 2, and I have to typecast
It as integer type.
So this happens in C++, and this happens in C language. So, this is the code for C++, this is the code for
C language. Most of the time, I would be using this one, right.
This is little lengthy. So I will be writing this one.
So that's all. 'new' is used for allocating memory in the heap. Now, program cannot directly access that,
it has to access pointer, pointer will give the address of that memory, then the program can reach
that location and access these integers. Now, one thing I told you that, Heap memory should be treated
like a resource. After some time, in your program, if you don't need that array, and you want to make p
as null, means you don't want this pointer p to point there, you don't need that memory anymore and you don't
want the pointer to point there, so you can make the pointer null. So, nothing will be pointing onto this
one. Then what about that memory? Is it lost?
Is it gone?
No.
It will not be de-allocated. So, it's a good practice that, when you don't need the memory, you should
de-allocate it, as you have requested for that location, same way you should request de-allocation of the
memory. So, say delete p. You must say delete, as it is an array, so you have to say this one. So, when you say
delete, this memory will be deleted, and then you can make the pointer as
null. So, this will become 0, this is not pointing on this location. So, that's all. Heap memory should be
explicitly requested, and explicitly released, or disposed. Otherwise, if you are not releasing it, then the
memory will be still belonging to your program, and that memory cannot be used again, so it causes loss
of memory, and the loss of memory is called as memory leak. And if you continue the same thing in the
program for many times, then at one stage, the heap memory may be full. There will be no free space in heap memory.
heap memory.
So whenever you allocate the memory, heap memory, and if you don't need it, release the memory.
So, let us conclude. We have seen static memory allocation, that was done inside the stack for all the
variables. Then, we have seen heap memory allocation, it is done with the help of pointers, and when not
in use, it must be released.
So finally, we conclude here.
We have seen how the static memory allocation is done, from the stack and how dynamic memory allocation
is done from the heap.
So this is the difference between stack and heap.
So then, in next video, I'll give you introduction to various data structures.